<pre>
  CIP: 2
  Layer: DLT Node
  Title: Authenticity and Integrity Protection of DLT Node API return values
  Author: Andrea Vesco <andrea.vesco@linksfoundation.com>
  Comments-Summary:
  Comments-URI: 
  Status: 
  Type: 
  Created: 2023-08-11
</pre>

## Abstract
Proposal to modify the read API of DLT Nodes to return signed values for authenticity and integrity verification.
This option is intended to avoid the need to establish a TLS secure channel with the DLT node before contacting the APIs. There are use cases where data must be retrieved from the DLT as quickly as possible.

<!-- TODO: .. -->

## Motivation

Distributed ledger provides data immutability (i.e. RoT for data stored in it). Today, an entity willing to consume the data from the ledger, setups a secure channel with one of DLT nodes and then contact the proper API to retrive the data. Transport Layer Security ([TLS](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446.txt)) protocol provides authentication of the DLT node serving the request, confidentiality and integrity of data in transit. 

Use cases exists where an entity wants to use a distributed ledger as the RoT for data but it cannot experience the additional delay caused by the TLS handshake to establish the secure channel with the DLT node to access the data. 

[SSIAuthTLS](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2311.00386) proposes adding SSI authentication to TLS handshake. In this scenario, a TLS endpoint needs to resolve the peer's DID (i.e. retrieve the public key of the peer from the distributed ledger) as quickly as possible. In this scenario, establishing an additional TLS channel with the DLT node is not an efficient option because it takes time (around tens of milliseconds); in addition, confidentility is not a requirement. Authentication of the DLT node serving the request and returning the DID Document and the integrity of the DID Document are the required two security features (see security analysis section in [SSIAuthTLS](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2311.00386)).


## Signature Generation
CIP-0002 proposes to provide the DLT node with an Self-Sovereign Identity at the application level so that the API implementation can sign the return values for authenticity and integrity purposes. It is not necessary to add the signature to all APIs exposed by a DLT node, but at least to the API read function. 

The signature should be considered as optional.

<!-- TODO: specify the format of return value of READ API function -->

Other use cases can take advantage from this improvement.

<!-- TODO: looking for other use cases -->

## Signature Verification

The entity contacting the DLT node read API must verify the signature selecting the proper public key from its trusted list. To some extend, the entity maintain a list of trusted DLT nodes exactly how it maintain the list of trusted Issuers (and public keys).

In the specific case of DID resolution case, the signature verification must be implemented within the  Resolve function of the DID Method.

<!-- TODO: what about returning the value along with the public key certified by a trusted issuer? -->

<!-- TODO: what about implementing somethig similar to OCSP stapling involving the issuer of DLT node's VC? -->

## Reference

- [Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) v1.0](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/)

## Copyright

Attribution 4.0 International [(CC BY 4.0)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
